Key Steps to Get Started

Create a project folder
Navigate to the folder
Initialize a Git repository

Initialize Git

git init 

Create a New File

touch git.txt
touch README.md

Here are some key commands for staging:

git add <file> - Stage a file
git add --all or git add -A - Stage all changes
git status - See what is staged
git restore --staged <file> - Unstage a file

Troubleshooting

Staged the wrong file? Use git restore --staged <file> to unstage it.
Forgot to stage a file? Just run git add <file> again before you commit.
Not sure what's staged? Run git status to see what will be committed.

commit 

git commit -m "message" - Commit staged changes with a message
git commit -a -m "message" - Commit all tracked changes (skip staging)
git log - See commit history


Other Useful Commit Options

Create an empty commit:
git commit --allow-empty -m "Start project"
Use previous commit message (no editor):
git commit --no-edit
Quickly add staged changes to last commit, keep message:
git commit --amend --no-edit

Use previous commit message (no editor):

=============================================

Troubleshooting Common Commit Mistakes
Forgot to stage a file?
If you run git commit -m "message" but forgot to git add a file, just add it and commit again. Or use git commit --amend to add it to your last commit.
Typo in your commit message?
Use git commit --amend -m "Corrected message" to fix the last commit message.
Accidentally committed the wrong files?
You can use git reset --soft HEAD~1 to undo the last commit and keep your changes staged.

What is a Tag?

A tag in Git is like a label or bookmark for a specific commit.

Tags are most often used to mark important points in your project history, like releases (v1.0 or v2.0).

Tags are a simple and reliable way to keep track of versions and share them with your team or users.

Some common tag types include:

Releases: Tags let you mark when your project is ready for release, so you (and others) can always find that exact version later.
Milestones: Use tags to highlight major milestones, like when a big feature is finished or a bug is fixed.
Deployment: Many deployment tools use tags to know which version of your code to deploy.
Hotfixes: If you need to fix an old version, tags make it easy to check out and patch the right code.

git tag -a v1.0 -m "Version 1.0 release"
git tag v1.1 1a2b3c4d
git tag
git show v1.0

git push origin v1.0
git push --tags
git tag -d v1.0
git push origin --delete tag v1.0
git tag -f v1.0 <new-commit-hash>
git push --force origin v1.0

Troubleshooting
Tag already exists? Use git tag -d <tagname> to delete it, then re-create.
Pushed the wrong tag? Delete it locally and remotely, then push the correct tag.
Tag not showing on remote? Remember to push tags with git push origin <tagname> or git push --tags.
Need to overwrite a tag on the remote? You can force-push a tag with git push --force origin <tagname>, but be careful! This will overwrite the tag for everyone using the remote.


Git Stash

Key Commands for Stashing
git stash - Stash your changes
git stash push -m "message" - Stash with a message
git stash list - List all stashes
git stash branch <branchname> - Create a branch from a stash

What is Git Stash? Why Use It?
Sometimes you need to quickly switch tasks or fix a bug, but you're not ready to commit your work.

git stash lets you save your uncommitted changes and return to a clean working directory.

You can come back and restore your changes later.

Here are some common use cases:

Switch branches safely: Save your work before changing branches.
Handle emergencies: Stash your work to fix something urgent, then restore it.
Keep your work-in-progress safe: Avoid messy commits or losing changes.


Stash Your Changes (git stash)
Save your current changes (both staged and unstaged tracked files) with:

What gets stashed?
Tracked files (both staged and unstaged) are stashed by default.
Untracked files (new files not yet added to Git) are not stashed by default.
To stash untracked files too, use git stash -u (or --include-untracked).


git stash
git stash push -m "WIP: homepage redesign"
git stash list
git stash show
git stash show -p
git stash apply
git stash apply stash@{n}
git stash drop
git stash clear
git stash branch

Use clear messages when stashing: git stash push -m "WIP: feature name"
Don't use stashes as long-term storage—commit your work when possible.
Check your stash list regularly and clean up old stashes you no longer need.


Troubleshooting
Did you lose your changes? Try git stash list and git stash apply to recover stashed work.
Stash didn't apply cleanly? You may need to resolve conflicts, just like a merge.
Git will mark the conflicts in your files for you to resolve.
Untracked files missing? By default, untracked files are not stashed.
If you need to stash them, use git stash -u next time.
Accidentally cleared all stashes? Unfortunately, git stash clear is permanent.
Always double-check before running it!


What is Git History? Why Use It?
Git keeps a detailed record of every change made to your project.

You can use history commands to see what changed, when, and who made the change.

This is useful for tracking progress, finding bugs, and understanding your project's evolution.

Key Commands for Viewing History
git log - Show full commit history
git log --oneline - Show a summary of commits
git show <commit> - Show details of a specific commit
git diff - See unstaged changes
git diff --staged - See staged changes
git diff <commit1> <commit2>
git log --author="Alice"
git log --since="2 weeks ago"
git log --stat
git log --graph


Best Practices for Viewing History

Make frequent, meaningful commits to keep your history clear.
Write clear commit messages so you and your team can understand changes later.
Use git log --oneline for a quick overview of your commit history.
Use git diff before committing to review your work.

Troubleshooting
Can't see your changes? Make sure you have committed your work. Uncommitted changes won't appear in the history.
Log is too long? Use git log --oneline or git log --since to make it easier to read.
How do I quit the log view? Press q to exit the log or diff view.


Why and When to Use Git Help?
Git has many commands and options.

If you forget how a command works or want to learn about its options, you can use Git's built-in help.

This is the fastest way to get answers without leaving your terminal.

Key Commands for Getting Help
git help <command> - See the manual page for a command
git <command> --help - See help for a command (same as above)
git <command> -h - See a quick summary of options
git help --all - List all possible Git commands
git help -g - List guides and concepts
List All Git Commands (git help --all)
git help -g Shows a list of guides and concept topics for deeper learning:


roubleshooting
How do I quit the help viewer? Press q to exit the help page.
Help page won't open? Try git <command> -h for a quick summary instead.
How do I search for a word? In the help viewer, press / then type your search term and press Enter.


What is a Git Branch?
In Git, a branch is like a separate workspace where you can make changes and try new ideas without affecting the main project. Think of it as a "parallel universe" for your code.

Common Reasons to Create a Branch
Developing a new feature
Fixing a bug
Experimenting with ideas


Without Git:
Make copies of all the relevant files to avoid impacting the live version
Start working with the design and find that code depend on code in other files, that also need to be changed!
Make copies of the dependant files as well. Making sure that every file dependency references the correct file name
EMERGENCY! There is an unrelated error somewhere else in the project that needs to be fixed ASAP!
Save all your files, making a note of the names of the copies you were working on
Work on the unrelated error and update the code to fix it
Go back to the design, and finish the work there
Copy the code or rename the files, so the updated design is on the live version
(2 weeks later, you realize that the unrelated error was not fixed in the new design version because you copied the files before the fix)

With Git:
With a new branch called new-design, edit the code directly without impacting the main branch
EMERGENCY! There is an unrelated error somewhere else in the project that needs to be fixed ASAP!
Create a new branch from the main project called small-error-fix
Fix the unrelated error and merge the small-error-fix branch with the main branch
You go back to the new-design branch, and finish the work there
Merge the new-design branch with main (getting alerted to the small error fix that you were missing)

Creating a New Branch
Let's say you want to add a new feature. You can create a new branch for it.

Let add some new features to our index.html page.

We are working in our local repository, and we do not want to disturb or possibly wreck the main project.

git branch git_branch_1

hi 